This video is brought to you by Noom. If you have 10 minutes a day,
I want to get serious about better eating habits. It's time to give a Numa,
try more on them in a bit.
It's a story that has become legendary. One.
The day of re American is taught at a young age,
less than a week after the long and bloody civil war or effectively came to an
end.
The man who has become perhaps America's most beloved president Abraham Lincoln,
was shot to death while watching a play.
The man who shot him was not a Confederate soldier or a politician,
but rather an actor who wasn't even from the south yet somehow became enamored
with their cause the group that he assembled hoped to plunge the north into
chaos and revive Southern hope for independence in this, they failed,
but in killing Lincoln, they irrevocably changed the course of American history.
Then the nation is still dealing with the fallout from the assassination today.
So who was John Wilkes booth?
What would cause this young man from Mary Lynn who had already built a
prosperous career for himself on the stage to become so devoted to the cause of
Southern nation hood that he would attempt to top all the federal government.
How did he get close enough to Lincoln to shoot him? What happens after he did?
And could his infamous act have been prevented.
When ju Brutus booth immigrated to the United States in 1821,
he was already a famous stage at actor in London.
He brought scandal with him to America. He had abandoned his wife and young son,
and instead brought his mistress, Maryanne Holmes with him.
He introduced her to everyone as his wife and the scandal was soon forgotten as
genius booth went on to become America's most famous actor specializing in
Shakespearean tragedies like Richard, the third Julius Caesar and Hamlet,
John Wilkes booth was born on the 10/18/38 at the booth family home in Bella,
Maryland. His father genius was never home, constantly touring.
And when he was his alcoholism and erratic behavior made life difficult for his
large family, he was sent to well regarded boarding schools,
but was an indifferent students much to the chagrin of his instructors.
Ju booth died in 1852 when John was only 14,
he decided afterwards to become an actor himself following in the footsteps of
older brothers, juniors,
junior and Edwin Edwin booth was becoming a household name himself and was able
to help his brother break into the theater.
His first performance was in 1855 in Baltimore.
And after an initial Rocky start of enduring stage fright and forgetting his
lines soon, he settled into a career as an actor.
He became just as famous as his brother and father gaining a reputation for
stealing scenes that he was in and his charisma and good looks made him
enormously popular with the nations young women. By the end of the 1850s,
he was a wealthy man earning over $20,000 a year and over half a million dollars
in today's terms. And he was touring all over the nation as a leading man,
Just as booth was coming into his own as an actor, it seemed the country,
it was on the verge of tearing itself apart the election of Abraham Lincoln in
1860 sparked fears throughout the Southern states that their right to own slaves
would be infringed on by the new administration.
They announced their intention to leave the union to succeed and form their own
nation, which they called the Confederate states of America.
Lincoln held that the Southern states had no right to leave the union and their
state governments were rebelling against federal authority.
And he called for the raising of an army to stop them in April, 1860.
And the first shots of the Americans of a war were fired,
fought sum in South Carolina,
Booth's home state of Maryland found itself in a difficult position.
Maryland was one of the four slave holding states that didn't join the
Confederacy known as border states.
Public opinion among ERs was sharply divided. Even among families.
Edwin booth was a staunch unionist while John Wilkes booth was a passionate for
the Southern course,
the Maryland state government tried to hedge its bets by voting to remain in the
union,
but also to prohibit federal troops from passing through the state or being
based there.
This would've made prosecution of the war impossible for the north and left the
federal capital of Washington DC exposed to Confederate troops across the river
in Virginia Lincoln. Wasn't having it.
He suspended the Riz of habe wars specifically in this case,
the rights to not be imprisoned without trial and jailed,
many Maryland state leaders at Fort McKen and Baltimore Harbor.
He also imposed Marshall law on the city of Baltimore and other parts of the
state and effectively occupied Maryland with federal troops for the duration of
the war. This outraged many pro Southern Marylanders,
including booth who Gordon Lincoln, a tyrant
John Wilkes booths have been involved in politics since 1854,
where he campaigns for the no nothing party,
an early nativist movement whose major campaign planks were anti-Catholic.
And anti-immigrants,
he was a passionate supporter of both the institution of slave aery and of the
Confederacy and spoke to everyone. He knew about his views by contrast,
his brother Edwin refused to tour in the south and spoke out against the
Confederacy. The two brothers argued with each other on the subject.
So viciously this,
they eventually stopped speaking to each other booth had promised his mother
when the war began that he would not enlist as a soldier.
So he continued to tour across both the north and south as a celebrated actor
though,
he increasingly began to paint himself for his decision writing in a letter to
his mother, that he felt like a coward and despised his own existence. In 1864,
the war began to turn badly against the Confederacy in Virginia.
Robert E Lee's army was pinned down in Petersburg,
losing men that it couldn't afford to replace. While in Georgia,
William T Sherman's army had captured the city of Atlanta rent began a campaign
of destruction in the deep south.
It seems increasingly likely that Lincoln would be reelected. And if so,
it was only a matter of time until the so was defeated and slavery was abolished
booth felt increasingly frustrated at his own helplessness to prevent this from
happening and began to channel his rage towards the person of Abraham Lincoln,
himself in a Congress station with his sister Asia,
he said of Lincoln that man's appearance, his pedigree, his course,
low jokes and anecdotes.
His vulgar smiles and his policy are a disgrace to the CT holds.
He has made the tool of the north to crush out slavery.
Something snapped within him.
And he decided that he was gonna do something about it and say,
if you want to do something about your dietary habits,
it's time to talk about today's video sponsor name. I know, look,
it's a new year.
So a lot of you out there probably have health and fitness goals, you know,
lighten up on the late night ice cream or lose 20 pounds by the summer,
you know, usual or staff,
and maybe you're in the market for a high quality weight loss tool that assists
in those goals.
But Noom goes way beyond your typical expectations for a weight loss regimen.
Some programs will make you track your calories or force you to eat their
special meals or do daily maths or shame you for enjoying bad foods.
Noom doesn't do any of that.
Instead it takes more or holistic approach to health,
providing you with the knowledge and counsel.
You need to make good dietary choices.
That's because getting healthy and losing weight are a whole lot easier.
If you know how and why you make the decisions you do when it comes to food and
beyond the health content,
there are tons of other perks that Noom can give you as well.
If you are interested looking to flex your new,
you found knowledge with some healthy recipes,
Noom has a bunch to share with you,
or maybe you are looking for some personalized attention.
I'll set yourself up with one of no's dietary coaches.
This is a comprehensive program that puts you on the path to healthy success.
So if you want to count points or buy a calculator,
but if you want to develop real healthy eating habits,
check out our friends at no. There is a link in the description below
Contrary to what many people think booth did not start out intending to
assassinate. The presidency had an even more ambitious plan in mind.
He would kidnap Lincoln and take him to Richmond. Once there,
he would ransom the president back the north in exchange for Confederate
prisoners held in Northern prison camps,
both demoralizing the north and providing the south with desperately needed
manpower to continue the war booth gathered around inmate group of Confederate
sympathizes to help with the kidnapping plot prominence among them were John
Sur, former postmaster and Confederate spy. George ARA,
PR and immigrants who ran a carriage repair business Lewis Powell,
a Confederate army deserter and David Herald pharmacist assistant the
conspirators frequently met at the boarding house owned by John C's mother.
Mary whose level of knowledge of and participation in the conspiracy is still
debated by historians today on March the 17th,
1865 booth assembled his fellow conspirators on the road side of Washington,
anticipating Lincoln passing through there on his way to a function planning to
season and secret him across the Potomac river into Virginia.
But Lincoln never turned up.
It turned out that he had changed his plans at the last minute.
And instead attended a reception at the national hotel in Washington,
ironically, the same hotel that booth himself was staying at a few weeks later,
it seemed all over Richmond's.
The capital of the Confederacy had been captured and after attempting to escape
property, Lee's army was forced to surrender at a bats on April the ninth,
for all intents and purposes, the civil war was over the plot to kid Lincoln,
no longer had any point to it. And boost was despondent and filled with rage.
His thoughts immediately took a darker turn towards assassination.
No one is really sure what booths exact motives were in killing Lincoln.
It is clear that he hated the president,
viewing him as the cause of all the south Smith Forgey,
but did he plot to murder Lincoln based on dedication to the cause of the south?
Perhaps he believed that taking out the head of the federal government would
allow the remnants of the Confederacy to reorganize and fight on.
Since there were still armies in the field or where the motivations were
personal, he could have hoped to make himself a hero to the south.
The man who slew the tire end Rutu kill Julia Caesar.
He could have wanted to do it merely to spite the north,
maybe even despite his Lincoln supporting brother Edwin,
or it could have been a combination of all of them.
What is known is that on the morning of April,
the 14th booth stopped in Ford's theater in Washington to pick up hiss mail
Ford's was a popular theater that had opened two years earlier to replace the
theater, burned down booth himself performed there regularly.
He learns that presidents and Mrs Lincoln were to attend to play there that
night,
accompanied by the commander of the union army UNES S grant and his wife booth
decided immediately,
this was a perfect time and place to kill both the presidents and the general.
If he could manage it,
booth gathered together his conspirators to lay out his plan.
Lou Powell was murdered to the secretary of state William seaward at his home.
George Azara would go to the hotel where vice president,
Andrew Johnson was staying and assassinate him and booth would slip into the
presidential box at Ford's theater during the play shoot Lincoln,
with the single shot Derringer pistol he had,
and then stab grant with a dagger that he would also be carrying booth,
probably assumed the,
the presidential box would be guarded and thought he could talk his way into an
audience with Lincoln by leveraging his famous an actor for his part,
Lincoln was a fan of Booth's performances and sent invitations to meet him at
the white house. Several times in the past that booth had turned down.
It seems amazing to us now,
but in 1865 security precautions for the presidents were almost nonexistence.
The secret service yet exist, and it wouldn't be until 1902,
that they were assigned the duty of protecting the president's life.
The white house was open to practically anyone who wanted to petition the
presidents and even in the middle of a civil war. Lincoln had few,
if anybody arms around him, when he went anywhere,
palace guards were thought to be the province of European monarchs,
not elected servants of the people.
Thus on the night that Lincoln went to the theater, he had only one bodyguard,
a police officer named John Frederick Parker,
General grants, and his wife decided not to go with Lincoln to the play.
Instead traveling to Philadelphia to spend time with their children.
It has been widely reported that Mary Todd and Julia Grant didn't like each
other. And that was why the grants didn't go. Whatever the case,
the decision likely saved the future president's life president and Mrs Lincoln
and their guests major Henry Roth bone and his fiance arrived at the theater
late situating themselves in the presidential box with John Frederick Parker
guarding the door. The play was stopped as the audience of 1,700,
a full house gave a standing ovation and the orchestra played held to the chief.
The play was a popular comedy. Our American cousin that booth knew by heart.
The plan was for all three would be assassins to strike at the same time,
10:00 PM while he waited booth stopped in next or at the star saloon taking a
drink of whiskey perhaps to calm his nerves around 10 15,
the play was in the middle of its third act.
Lincoln had been seen to be enjoying the play and nobody was paying attention to
what was happening behind the presidential box booth had gone into the theater
and up the stairs and found nobody outside the door to the presidential box.
The policeman John F. Parker had left during the intermission to go drinking.
And wasn't it. A,
his post booth went into the small laundry room that separated the box from the
hallway and bared the door behind him.
Now only one door separated him from the presidents.
He looked through a peephole in the door,
ultimately described as being cut by booth himself or by the owner of the
theater sometime earlier for an unrelated purpose and waited.
He knew from experience that the line in the play that caused the biggest
audience reaction was coming up and he would strike. Then on stage the actor,
Harry Hawk said the line,
the booth was waiting for don't know the man as of good society. Eh, well,
I guess I know enough to turn you inside out on gal. You sock.
Dollarizing old man trap as the whole audience, including president Lincoln,
laugh booth opened the door to the box,
aimed as pistol at the back of Lincoln's head and fired from point blank range.
The president slumped forward in his chair,
major Rathburn lept to his feet and made to grab booth who dropped his gun and
pulled out his dagger slicing open Rath bone's arm,
almost the bone Unter Rath bone grabbed again. Booth's coat.
As the assassin attempted to jump from the box to the stage.
12 feet below booth had to twist away from Rath bone and in the process,
his spur at caught on the buns draped over the front of the presidential box.
He awkwardly fell to the stage, breaking his leg,
probably running high on adrenaline booth,
ignored the pain and with an actor's flare for the dramatic,
held his bloody knife up to the audience and yelled sick Tyran, which is Latin.
The thus always Tyrons. It's also the state motto at Virginia.
Some witnesses also reportedly heard the south is avenged.
Then he limped behind the stage, out the back door,
stabbed someone that tried to stop him, mounted his horse and Gallup away.
Many in the audience initially thought the booth was part of the plane until the
first lady screams just as booth was fleeing the scene as word spread that the
president had been shot. The city of Washington fell into chaos.
Things got even worse.
When reports that secretary Seawood had been attacked as well,
came in Louis Powell had arrived at sea's house in Lafayette park around the
same time as booth was entering forts theater.
He bluffed his way past the doorman,
but not one of Seawood sons who tried to intercept him.
Powell pulled a gun on him, but the gun misfired.
So how bludgeoned him unconscious with the,
but then he ran into the secretary of state's bedroom, Widing,
a large Bowie knife Seawood was in bed,
recovering from a carriage accident 10 days earlier,
which had left him with a broken drawer in arm power slash repeatedly at the
secretary's face and neck with a knife.
But the splints that the doctor had fixed onto sea what's head to hold his
broken drawer in place, saved his life,
preventing Powell from slicing his jugular vein. Another of Seawood sons,
his daughter, and a soldier who served as an attendant,
struggled with the attacker and were stabbed in turn before Powell ran outta the
house, cackling and screaming. I'm mad, I'm mad.
He stabbed another pass by before escaping everyone,
Powell attacked would eventually recover.
Although William seaward would carry the scars from the attack on his face for
the rest of his life. As for George,
Anati never even tried to assassinate vice president Johnson.
He made it to the hotel where Johnson was staying,
but lost his nerve and got drunk at the bar.
Instead wandering around the streets of Washington before disposing of his knife
in a storm drain.
Lincoln was carried from the theater across the street to the home of William
Peterson, where he was attended to by brigade of doctors,
including the surgeon general, but there was nothing they could do.
It is likely that even today with modern medicine,
the wound would've been mortal,
Abraham Lincoln died at 7:22 AM on April the 15th,
surrounded by much of his cabinet.
The news spread quickly across the country causing an outpouring of grief.
Vice president Johnson was sworn in as president of the United States at 11:00
AM,
but the reigns of government were now in the hands of the secretary of war Edwin
Stanton. He began the investigation into the plot before Lincoln had died,
essentially running the government from Peterson house.
John Wilkes booth was quickly fingered as the assassin by multiple witnesses in
the theater. And he became the most wanted man in America.
Lisa bluffed his way out of Washington before the city was put into lockdown and
escaped into Southern Maryland. Along with his accomplished David Herald,
he hopes that the relatively rural area full of Confederate sympathizers would
be the perfect place to hide out while slipping into Virginia,
where he expected to be phased as a hero.
He and Harolds picked up guns and supplies from Mary threats,
Tavan outside the city,
and then stopped at the home of Dr. Samuel Mar an acquaintance of booths who set
his broken leg and gave him place to sleep.
Mud would later be arrested and sentenced to prison for assisting booths though.
His role in the conspiracy like Mary Sur is hotly debated booth,
and TAs then went to grounds hiding in the swamps on the VIG in Maryland border.
It was there. The booth seemed to grasp the magnitude of what he had done.
He was being given newspapers by a man named Thomas Jones,
a Confederate spy who lived in the area.
And that was how he learned that Stanton had put a $50,000 bouncy on his head.
Staggering.
Some of the time he also learns that most of his co-conspirators had been
arrested already, including AUM Al and by April the 21st,
the only conspirators still at large,
where booth himself Herald still with booth and John Sur who had escaped across
the board to Canada. And then to Europe, he wouldn't be arrested until November,
1866 worse were booth. He saw that the reaction to his act,
wasn't all that he hoped for far from considering him as Tys.
Almost everyone in the north was shocked de polled at Lincoln's murder,
even as theist critics and many people in the south were similarly unimpressed
with booths act though,
some of that may be chalked up to self-preservation many in the south fears that
an angry Northern population would exact revenge on the south for Lincoln's
death.
Federal troops were scouring Southern Marylands for the assassin and with no
heroes. Welcome to look forward to booth,
decided to cross into Virginia and continue south,
perhaps all the way to Mexico,
to escape federal authorities after getting lost along the way,
booth and Herald made it to Virginia. On April the 23rd,
they arrived at farm owns by Richard Garrett family that didn't know yet that
Lincoln had been assassinated or that booth was a huge Whil worth.
Got back to Washington about booths movements and a detachment of soldiers led
by Lieutenant Colonel. Evan Conns,
Lieutenant Edward dirty was sent to find booth and capture him
Congar and dirty tracked booth to the Garrett farmhouse and surrounded the
tobacco bar. They were hiding in shortly before Dawn on April the 26th,
David Herald quickly surrendered,
but booth refused saying that he'd prefer to come out and fight in an attempt to
spare him out. The soldiers set far to the barn.
There are conflicting accountants about what happened next. One of the soldiers,
Sergeant Boston Cort drew a beat on booth through a crack in the wall at the
barn.
Corbit said that booth raised his gun to shoot cor orbit upon which Corbert
fired others alleged that Cobert fired on an unarmed booth out of a sense of
vengeance, but no one will ever know for sure.
The bullet struck booth in the neck severing his spinal column and damaging
three vertebrae.
He collapsed to the grounds paralyzed and was dragged outta the barn by
soldiers.
Booth was unable to move and in excruciating pain over the course of next two
hours, he begged the soldiers kill him. At one point,
he asked one of the soldiers to pull up his hand so that he could see them.
The soldier complied and booth looked at them, mattering, useless, useless.
They were his last words. Soon after he died,
two weeks shy of his 27th birthday,
Edwin Stan had wanted booth taken alive and initially planned to core martial
Boston Corbert for killing a him, but the case was dismissed.
And Corbit went on to be known as Lincoln's Avenger by the public.
The other conspirators were tried by military tribunal. Soon afterwards,
four of them, George Arod Lewis Powell, David,
her and Mary Surat were sentenced to death and were hanged on July. The seventh,
four more were sentenced to prison terms. One died in prison,
but the other three were pardoned by president Johnson short before he left
office in 1869. John Surat was never convicted of his role in the plot.
And many believed that his mother had been hanged in his place.
The consequences of Abraham Lincoln's death had a profound effect on American
history. It deprived the country of their leader, right?
When they needed him the most to help heal the nation and bind it back together.
Andrew Johnson,
a unionist southerner at no interest in making sure the slaves freed during the
war were set up for success in the postwar south.
His primary interest was in getting the troops out of the former Confederacy as
soon as possible and restoring order meaning controlled by the antebellum white
politicians that had plunged the country into conflict in the first place,
it would set him against Congress and most of his own cabinet.
And he became the first president impeached.
He was suddenly saved from being removed from office by a single vote without
Lincoln support for Reed slaves eventually dried up and by 1876,
when the last of the federal troops withdrawn,
the former Confederate states had enacted so-called Jim Crow laws that
segregated black citizens and made it almost impossible for them to exercise any
of their civil rights while it is impossible to say how things would've been
different. If Lincoln had lived,
it is certain that they would've been different.
And in all likelihood would've been better for everyone,
but especially African Americans as with John Wilkes booth,
his name as is the fate of many assassins is irrevocably tied to that
of the great Manny SL what sets booth apart from people like Lee,
Harvey Oswold or James Earl Ray,
is that they were driven in no small parts by the compulsion to become famous by
killing a famous person. Booth was already famous before assassinating Lincoln,
which makes it all the more strange that he would do it.
We must accept however that it was his fanatical devotion to the cause of the
Confederacy and to the preservation of slavery that led him away from the
comfortable path laid in front of him and down the dark road that tended with
the deaths of both himself and the presidents that were so beloved by many yet
hated by him.
It also seems obvious that if a modicum of protection had been in place booth
would not have been able to access the presidential box that night armed as he
was, and history would've been much different, but he did.
And that is why we considered John Wilkes booth America's most infamous
assassin. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below. Don't forget to subscribe also.
Please do check it our fantastic sponsor. No,
who I'm linking you below and thank you for watching.